# SoftBound

## Problem
- C/C++ lacks of bounds checking:
  - no spatial memory safety
  - leads to bugs and vulnerabilities.
- OS and compilers provide only partial countermeasures:
  - guarding return address
  - address space randomization
  - non-executable stack
- C/C++ is hard to retrofit (too flexible and low-level):
  - conflation of pointers and arrays
  - unchecked array indexing
  - arbitrary pointer arithmetic
  - pointers to the middle of objects
  - arbitrary casts
  - programmer-visible memory layout
  - structures with internal arrays
- C/C++ is in widespread use, hard to replace:
  - Low level control of memory layout
  - Proximity to hardware
  - minimal runtime support
  - performance standard
  - OS, VM, runtimes, browsers.

## Existing approaches
  - Object-based: Sub-object violations
  - Pointer-based:
    - Bad compatibility: change memory layout.
    - High runtime overhead
    - Require non-trivial changes to src
    - Arbitrary casts
    - Complicate separate compilation.
  - Hardbound: needs hardware support, which won't be available soon.

## SoftBound
- Gists:
  - Inspired by HardBound, but Software-only
  - Compile-time transformation, insert code for runtime propagation and checking of pointer bounds
  - Associate "base" and "bound" metadata with every pointer (not every object).
  - Record metadata in a disjoint facility.
  - Only access metadata via explicit table lookups on "load" and "store" of pointer values.
  - Intra-procedural transformation
  - Functions with pointer args or rets are extended with additional parameters for "base" and "bound" metadata.
  - Conceptually pointer-based, but disjoint metadata provides the compatibility of object-based
- Features:
  - Src compatibility
  - Completeness
  - Separate compilation

- Mechanism
  - Pointer checking and Metadata Propagation:
    1. pointer dereference:
      - `*` operator
      - `check(ptr, base, bound, size)` before dereference
    2. creating pointers:
      - malloc, `&` operator
      - set base and bound after creation
    3. Pointer arithmetic and assignment:
      - ptr+index, &(ptr[index])
      - propagate base and bound after operation.
    4. Structure field access: covered by #3.
    5. Optional narrowing of pointer bounds:
      - `->` operator
      - Optional.
      - change base and bound after assignment.
  - In-memory pointer metadata encoding:
    - Use a table to store metadata.
    - Lookup base and bound after load of a pointer value
    - Update base and bound after store of a pointer value
  - Metadata propagation with function calls:
    - When args or ret is ptr: pass base and bound info along with them.

- Implementation:
  - Hash table: tag, base, bound
  - Shadow space: a large enough table

## Impact
- Overhead:
  - For debugging and security-critical software: Full checking mode, 67%.
  - For end-user production code: Store-only checking mode, 22%.
- Solves the problems of existing approaches:
  - Sub-object violations: conceptual pointer-based, optional narrowing of pointer bounds.
  - Change memory layout: disjoint metadata
  - High runtime overhead: Overhead of SoftBound is proved to be acceptable.
  - Require non-trivial changes to src: compile-time code insertion, no need to change src.
  - Arbitrary casts: check() function ensures the entire access is in bounds.
  - Complicate separate compilation: metadata propagation with function calls.
  - Needs hardware support: Software only